So you had some students also from Arkansas. But
second to Texas, the largest numbers came from
Louisiana. Yeah, out-of-state students. And was
there a difference between the quality of the
out-of-state and the in-state students? Oh, no.
The Louisiana boys were really good. Actually,
Louisiana picked their own students, you see.
They had to pay an out-of-state fee. And then that
southern college
Combine, whatever it was, anyway, the states
without schools paid a certain amount for each
out-of-state student accepted it. Texas A&M, so
Louisiana boys were uniformly good. But then when
they put in the two-year prerequisite, I mean,
yeah, and Then the court system, where we got up to
where we had three or four boys, or three or four
people, I should say, applying for each place.
That means when a boy does get accepted, he don't
fool around. If you waited two or three years to get
in school, you're not going to throw it away for one
Saturday night beer bust.
As far as the age of the students were concerned,
you went to Kansas State at an older age than most of
the students. Were most of the students here back
in the 1940s young? Oh, yes. They were in their
early 20s. Once in a while, you'd have one 19, but
most of them were 21, 22, 23. And I don't know what
percentage, but quite a few were people like
county agents Agricultural people that decided
they wanted to be veterinarians. Did you have any
with former college? Oh yeah, quite a few. After
the war in 1945, when the GI's came back, then when
we really started to grow and when we really got
uniformly good students, because we were went
into a lot of jam sessions about these veterans
coming back and they'd been used to being men. Of
course, most of them, a lot of them were officers.
And they'd give us a lot of baloney about how we had
to treat them. Well, I never saw a better bunch of
boys than those. They were polite and they'd say,
sir, when you call the roll. And it wasn't
difficult to, pick out who was flunk, it's
difficult to pick out who you're gonna give the
honors to. Dean Price out here graduated in 49, he
was in the first class of the veterans. They came in
in 45 and then on, and then on for about four or five
years while the veterans predominated. And then I
believe it was 1960, correct me on that if I'm
wrong, and they opened it to the co-eds. Might have
been later.
But the girls were uniformed.
It seems a rather interesting aspect of Texas A&M
that these young men came back from the military,
many of them having been officers, and then they
became corpsmen. How did they respond to that? I
don't know. You got me there. Doesn't that seem
rather strange? Because the Corps itself seems to
be a training ground to make officers. I don't
know, but I know they were good students. I'd take a
class of veterans any time over a bunch of kids just
out of school. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. A great number of
them were married and some of them had children and
they were serious. Very serious I would imagine.
Now back in 1888 the university named Dr. Mark
Francis as associate professor of veterinarian
sciences and the veterinarian for the experiment
station And he remained at Texas A&M for almost a
half a century. Did you have... June, June 1936,
and I came here in February 1936. Right, so... I
knew him five months. You knew him for five months.
What were your, how did you meet him, do you
remember? Well, he was actually acting head of the
Department of Veterinary Science and acting
dean, Ned Payton. Dr. Mark took over his active
duties, and Dr. Smith took over him in the
veterinary science. But he was an active old man.
He came around and introduced himself to me the
second day I was there. He said he hoped I liked it
here. What were your first impressions? Oh, I
loved him. He was about my size. In fact, he was near
enough my size that I sat in for the photographer or
the artist when they painted the pictures. for Dr.
Francis.
What do you think, although you only knew him for
five months, did you have much of an opportunity to
get to know him and could you comment about his
character or just the type of personality he was?
Oh he was, well you couldn't help but like him and he
had a keen brain. He'd ask you searching
questions. The trouble was he was almost totally
deaf. Oh. And he had trouble communicating. For
that reason, he talked a lot rather than letting
you talk. Incidentally, you may wonder how I'm
talking to you now, but I had a double ear operation
in 1960. So I removed the interstates and I got rid
of my hearing aids. Oh, good, good. Yeah, I was
wondering that. That's great. So Dr. Francis was
almost deaf, too. Was he deaf? Was this a... I don't
know the clinical aspects of it. Oh, okay. That's
what I was going to ask. That's what I was going
to ask. Okay, clinical. But Dr. Francis
single-handedly
developed the immunization for Texas fever,
rather pre-immunization. He single-handedly
sold Texas on the fact they had to get rid of the
tick. And he single-handedly started the School
of Medicine, that old school over there now where
the engineers had it. In the depth of depression in
1932, he went over to the legislature and
single-handedly got that appropriation. So
Texas owes a wonderful debt to Dr. Francis. And
yet, as far as I know, he never really antagonized
anybody. He sold them on lodging. But he was a smart
veterinarian. He was a highly intelligent man.
That's a better way to put it. You said that there
was something about him that was very likable.
Why? Or what was it? Oh, I don't know. That little
fly grin and his sense of humor. Mm-hmm. Good sense
of humor. He had a wonderful sense of humor.
Mm-hmm. I remember he was telling me about one time
he come up there and he just found a little piece of
paper where somebody back in Ohio or Minnesota or
someplace had figured the world was formed 1,890
years ago at 9 o'clock in the morning. He looked at
me, he just giggled and said, 9 o'clock. Now I've
been more like it. Walked
off. You know, he was originally from Ohio and did
his college at Ohio State. Did he ever say anything
about? why he stayed for so long in Texas. I mean,
after he began to establish this. Well, I think he
took it as a challenge. And not only that, but the
first faculty members of Texas A&M were from Ohio
State. Dr. Mark Duller came in 1905, and Dr. Dunn
came in 1911. D.W. Williams was an agriculture, an
Ohio stater. And Penn versus Ohio State. In fact,
for years, the curriculum of Texas A&M was almost
identical to that of Ohio State.
Is that because Ohio State was recognized as the
leader? No, I think it's primarily because Dr.
Dunn, Dr. Mark Taylor, and Dr. Francis were from
Ohio State. Of course, you always think your old
home state's the best. Sure, sure. Mm-hmm. What
were the finest veterinary colleges in the
country back at that time? Well, I couldn't be
prejudiced. I'd say Kansas State, but actually
Cornell and Ohio and Iowa probably were the three,
the big three. Philadelphia was a private school.
In other words, it wasn't state supported like
Yale and Harvard and, you know,
But Texas, see, graduated its first class in 1920,
and those other schools had 20 years or so more than
that. Dr. Francis graduated in 1888.
So they had a lot longer to... Sure, to develop a
program.
There were a lot of other important people who were
instrumental in the early years of the School of
Veterinarians. And I'd like you to comment on some
of these people, like Marsteller, Ross Perry
Marsteller. Well, Dr. Marsteller was dedicated
to making this, the Bascule in the United States.
Dr. Marks had a way sometimes of rubbing people the
wrong way. In his later years, he was not in very
good health. And I think he antagonized people
sometimes when he didn't mean to. Dr. Dunn was just
as dedicated, but he was quiet and easygoing. And
really, I think he did as much or more as any of them
to keep a level of academic excellence. He was a
scholar, really, too. And what about Marsdall?
Was he a scholar? Well, I really didn't know him
that well. I was busy keeping out of Dr. Schmidt's
way. Yeah, let's talk about him. Let's talk about
Herbert Schmidt for a while. Hubert, Hubert.
Hubert, Hubert, yes. Could you tell me about him?
Well, Darcy Smith was a big man. He was six foot plus
and weighed around 200 pounds, 220.
He graduated in animal husbandry from Texas A&M
and was on the football team and played 60 minutes
of every game. And he was a native. He was born to
German immigrants near Comfort, Texas. And Dr.
Francis took a liking to him. He asked him why he
didn't go to Berlin, because at that time, before
the war, Berlin, Germany, was topped on medicine
and chemistry and a hell of a lot of other things. So
with Dr. Francis urging, Smith went to Germany and
took a degree in veterinary medicine over there.
And he came back and Dr. Francis put him in charge of
all research work for it. And veterinary science
for the station. And Dr. Smith was methodical. And
he had a brain, he was smart, there's no question
about that. But he just had one fault. He didn't
believe it unless he read it in German first. Due to
his German background. The first thing he told me
when I started working for him was I'd better learn
to read German and I did. Really? Yeah, I read
German. I never could pronounce it like he wanted
me
to. What type of administrator was he? Well, he
wasn't too good because he was a perfectionist. A
perfectionist is hard to work for. In other words,
It's like I say, not like I do, you know. But I had no
trouble with him. I worked for nine years. I left
because... Another opportunity. Yeah.
What about the type of administrators at Marsdell
and Dunn were? Well, Dr. Marsdeller, maybe I
shouldn't say this because he's dead, but He liked
to keep everybody just a little afraid of him. He
had a tendency to yell when a whisperer would have
probably done better. Oh, I see. But he worked like
the devil for the school. There was no doubt about
that. He kept going through those years when we had
no appropriations. He'd scrunch and knock around
corners and whatnot to get the job done.
And what about Dunn? Oh, Dunn, everybody loved
him. He had no trouble in the department at all. In
fact, I think they gave Dunn a dirty deal, and they
made him dean, and then later they burned him out,
and
put Dunn back, and almost broke his heart. What
happened there? I'm not aware of this episode.
Well, when Dr. Marksteller died, they made Dr.
Dean Dunn. And evidently the powers that be, I
don't know the ins and outs of it, because I never
was much for politics. I tried to stay out of their
way. Why?
They brought in Dr. Boughton from Sonora and made
him Dean. returned Dr. Dunn to his department of
bacteriology
and it was a kind of a shock because he only had three
or four more years to go but he never he would he was
kind of reminded to get his feelings hurt
and I guess I would have too sure and if he hadn't
been old if he hadn't been As old as he was, he
probably would have picked up and left, but nobody
wants to hire a man sixty-two or three years old.
How about Van Bauchenberg? Well, Van Bauchenberg
was a Cornell graduate, and he came here from
Puerto Rico, where he had been in charge of
experimentation down there, and he was really a
nice guy. but he had bad luck physically. Hi, how
are you? This is Mr. Anderson, that's my wife. Glad
to meet you. And so he came from Puerto Rico. To
Texas. See, the Department of Veterinary Affairs
dogs were just established that year. Before
that, they'd all been lumped under Dr. Dunn.
What kind of man was Van Bakken? Well, he was a A
gentleman never meaning a word, that's the only
thing I can say. He was quiet spoken, but he had
trouble physically. He had a busted appendix and
he was in the hospital for several months. And
that's the time that I started teaching
parastology, you know, filling in the gaps. And
then he died suddenly of a heart attack. He never
was, he never was strong physically after. But he
was quite interested. He was a working member of
the Baptist Church, secretary of the Rotary Club,
and the boys liked him very well. But he was kind of
like Dr. Dunn. He was soft-spoken. He didn't make
much noise.
I personally thought he was one of the best friends
I had. He was, he was keen on Lexi. He was smart.
Then his boy got killed in the war. He was a waist
gunner on a bomber. That must have been a terrible
shock. Sort of dropped him down more.
So really, there's not too much to say about Van
Volkenberg. He just did his job and didn't make any
waves.
OK, I think that
we should continue and bring the story from the
1940s up until you retired in the 1960s. But let's
do that next time we talk. All right. All right?
Fine. OK, this ends our interview then.
This is an interview with Dr. RT Turk. Interview
number two. Today's date is January 17, 1980. This
is Terry Anderson.
This is the second interview with Dr. Turk. on
Thursday, January 17th, 1980. This is Terry
Anderson. Let's start this by talking about the
changes in curriculum. Well, to understand that,
we'll have to have a little bit of history.
When World War I broke out, the Army needed
buttonheads.
And they were rather disgruntled to find that many
of the local, many of the practicing
veterinarians were inadequately educated. The
reason for that was that most of the veterinary
schools were private schools. There were only
about six or eight schools in the United States
that offered the veterinary degree, but they were
25 or 30 or possibly more private veterinary
schools. Some of these had only the equivalent of
college education, others only the equivalent of
being able to read or write. Some of them had a
six-month course and some of them had three years.
Another thing that happened that no one was
interested in veterinary education anymore
because there weren't going to be any more horses.
In 1914, Ford perfected his assembly line, and
World War I came along, and planes and cars and so
forth were the wave of the future. So the National
Defense Act of 1920, among other things,
stipulated the requirements for a veterinarian
who would be eligible for government service.
That included not only the Army, but also the
United States Department of Agriculture with its
meat inspectors and the quarantine service with
its animal health inspectors. Very few of the,
well actually none of the private veterinary
schools could meet the requirements. So they
closed one by one.
Why couldn't they meet those requirements? Well,
for the expense. They required English and
history and bacteriology and pathology and many
things besides purely clinical veterinary
medicine. But nobody cared because there weren't
going to be any use for veterinarians anymore
anyway.
In 1929, the first purely small animal hospital
was established in Kansas City by a man named Dr.
Flynn. How do you spell that? F-L-Y-N-N. Who could
not do large animal practice because he had a
wooden leg.
In 1932,
The demand for veterinarians were so slim that
the University of Georgia closed their school
down. And the veterinarians that were eligible to
graduate came to Kansas State and various other
colleges. They just deported them out. In 1929,
Texas A&M graduated one student. Dr. W.T. Hardy in
the House of Nora, Texas. In 1933, the year I
graduated from Kansas State, Texas A&M only
graduated four students. Dr. J.W. Dollahy was one
of those.
Then, along about 1938 or 1939,
the public awakened to the fact that The average
age of all veterinary in the United States was
about 55 or 56 years old, and there would soon be an
acute shortage.
So the trend on veterinary medicine picked up.
About that time, the boys on the East Coast,
particularly from New York, found out they could
go to Google Keeper in Texas Georgia and Alabama
and even Colorado and Washington than they could
in New York. So we had the influx of students. So in
1939, they put in the requirement that students
could come only from the state in which school was
located or from adjoining states. Was that a state
requirement or a Texas A&M requirement? It was a
state requirement all across, all the colleges
went in and joined because I think we had I believe
79 students in 1939 of which purely 50% were from
New York City. Really? 50% from New York City? They
were from Upper New York.
Even
then, the pressure on veterinary faculty to take
care of the students that applied mattered.
they began to stiffen their requirement for
entrance.
I noticed in 1936 there was a new requirement
established for entrance into the vet school. You
had to have 15 hours of pre-professional college
work. Now, what impact did that have on the student
body? That had really much more limit than they
anticipated. But it did. Limited the amount of
students much more than they anticipated? Much
less than they anticipated. Oh, much less than
they anticipated, okay. Because many of the
applicants at that time had already had two years
in agriculture or quite a few of them even had BS
degrees in agriculture, so all year related
biological
sciences.
Then
they went along, though, until 1941 when the war
broke out.
And again, the veterinary schools were
fighting for students. However, I forget when
Georgia reopened their school, but anyway, No
more schools went down. Was the school in Georgia
or was it a Georgia Tech? It was the University of
Georgia at Athens.
Then in 1945, the war was over and the first crop of
veterans came in. Again, many more students
applied than were
able to be accommodated. So the various colleges
got together and put in a pre-veterinary, how do
you call it? Curriculum. No, prerequisite. Oh,
prerequisite. In reality, it meant two years
pre-vet. Right. Even that didn't stop. the
veterinary students. So... Was this the American
Veterinarian Association that got together
and... No, the... Or was it an intercollegiate? It
was intercollegiate. Mm-hmm. With, of course,
the approval and blessing of the AVMA, but the AVMA
was only in advisory capacity. Right. Those
fellows in Chicago can't tell. It's like
explaining to them how to run the school, you see.
Oh, absolutely. Right. But they do have a...
a so-called accredited list that you have to
graduate from a certain type of school before you
become a member of the AMMA. Well, or rather to be
from a college recognized by the AMMA.
So with the two-year prerequisite deal, many of
the
subjects that before had been offered in
veterinary school, like, for example, English,
entomology,
mathematics, physics, and so forth, were
transferred to the two-year pre-vet school, and
that allowed the veterinary school proper the
four years of pre-professional training to
concentrate primarily on veterinary medicine
and veterinary medicine alone. So it was
basically, after the Second World War, then it was
basically switched to a six-year program. Yes.
And so the curriculum
was established
by the Association of Veterinary Colleges,
actually it's an association of beings.
And...